Spark client export documentation (#1693)
treeverse/lakeFS: docs/reference/export.md

---
layout: default
title: Exporting data
description: Use lakeFS spark client to export lakeFS commit to the object store. 
parent: Reference
nav_exclude: true
has_children: false
---

# Exporting data
{: .no_toc }
The export operation copies all data from a given lakeFS commit to 
a designated object store location.

> For instance, the contents `lakefs://example@master` might be stored on

Reviewer: Consider:

```suggestion
For instance, the contents `lakefs://example@master` might be exported on
```

("stored" implies to me that the actual files are there all the time)

Author: Done.

`s3://company-bucket/example/latest`.  Clients entirely unaware of lakeFS could use that
base URL to access latest files on `master`.  Clients aware of lakeFS can continue to use
the lakeFS S3 endpoint to access repository files on `s3://example/master`, as well as
other versions and uncommitted versions.

Possible use-cases:
1. External consumers of data don't have access to your lakeFS installation.
1. Some data pipelines in the organization are not fully migrated to lakeFS.

> 1. You want to experiment with lakeFS as a side-by-side installation first.

Reviewer: 1. Create copies of your data lake in other regions (taking into account read pricing).

Author: Done.

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

## How to use

Set up lakeFS spark metadata client with the endpoint and credentials as instructed in the previous [page](./spark-client.md).

> The client exposes the `exporter` object with 3 export options:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The client exposes the `Exporter` object with 3 export options:
```
also below

Author: Done.

> 1. Exporting ALL objects at the HEAD of a given branch. Does not include

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Exporting *all* objects at the HEAD of a given branch. Does not include
```
also below

Author: Done.

> 1. Exporting *all* objects at the HEAD of a given branch. Does not include

Reviewer: I think this should go in the imperative mode.  @peacing as a native speaker WDYT?

```suggestion
1. Export *all* objects at the HEAD of a given branch. Does not include
```

Author: Done.

> files which were added to that branch, but were not committed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
files that were added to that branch, but were not committed.
```

Author: Done.

> uncommitted files which were added to that branch, but were not committed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
files which were added to that branch, but were not committed.
```

Author: Done.

   
```scala
exportAllFromBranch(branch: String)
```

2. Exporting ALL objects from a commit:

```scala
exportAllFromCommit(commitID: String)
```

> 3. Exporting just the diff between a commit and the HEAD of a branch.
> This is the ideal option for continuous exports of a branch, as it will change only the files
> that were changed from the previous commit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Exporting just the diff between a commit and the HEAD of a branch.
This is the ideal option for continuous exports of a branch, as it will change only the files
that have been changed since the previous commit.
```

Author: Done.

```scala
exportFrom(branch: String, prevCommitID: String)
```   

## Success/Failure Indications
When the Spark export operation ends, an additional status file will be added to the root 

> object storage location.

Reviewer 2: to the destination?

Author: Yes, fixed.

> If all files were exported successfully the file path will be of form: `EXPORT_<commitID>_SUCCESS`.
> and for failures: `EXPORT_<commitID>_FAILURE`, and the file will include a log of the failed files operations.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If all files were exported successfully the file path will be of the form: `EXPORT_<commitID>_SUCCESS`.
For failures, the form will be `EXPORT_<commitID>_FAILURE`, and the file will include a log of the failed files operations.

```

Author: Done.

> For failures: the form will be`EXPORT_<commitID>_FAILURE`, and the file will include a log of the failed files operations.

Reviewer: A bit late to this party, but it occurs to me that sorting these files (there will be many) is hard.  Maybe change to `EXPORT_<ISO-8601-time>_<commitID>_{SUCCESS,FAILURE}`?

Author: All you wanted for Christmas was this [issue](https://github.com/treeverse/lakeFS/issues/1714)?

> ## Export Rounds (spark success files)

Reviewer: Capitalize "Spark" (apparently English is even stranger than Go) :-(

```suggestion
## Export Rounds (Spark success files)
```

Author: Done. here and elsewhere.

Some files should be exported before others, e.g. a Spark `_SUCCESS` file exported before other files under
the same prefix might send the wrong indication.

> The export operation may contain several `rounds` within the same export.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The export operation may contain several *rounds* within the same export.
```
Also below (below you can even remove the backticks and just leave it plain)

Author: Done.

A failing round will stop the export of all the files of the next `rounds`.

By default, lakeFS will use the `SparkFilter` and have 2 `rounds` for each export.
The first round will export any non Spark `_SUCCESS` files. Second round will export all Spark's `_SUCCESS` files.
Users may override the default behaviour by passing a custom `filter` to the `exporter`.  

## Example

1. First configure the `exporter` instance:

 ```scala
   import io.treeverse.clients.{ApiClient, Exporter}
   import org.apache.spark.sql.SparkSession

   val endpoint = "http://<LAKEFS_ENDPOINT>/api/v1"
   val accessKey = "<LAKEFS_ACCESS_KEY_ID>"
   val secretKey = "<LAKEFS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY>"
   

>    val repo = "my-repo"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   val repo = "example-repo"
```
(this is our convention)
also below

Author: Done.

   val spark = SparkSession.builder().appName("I can export").master("local").getOrCreate()
   val sc = spark.sparkContext
   sc.hadoopConfiguration.set("lakefs.api.url", endpoint)
   sc.hadoopConfiguration.set("lakefs.api.access_key", accessKey)
   sc.hadoopConfiguration.set("lakefs.api.secret_key", secretKey)
   
   // Add any required spark context configuration for s3 
   val rootLocation = "s3://company-bucket/example/latest"
   
   val apiClient = new ApiClient(endpoint, accessKey, secretKey)
   val exporter = new Exporter(spark, apiClient, repo, rootLocation)
 
 ```

> a. Now you can export all objects from `main` branch under `s3://company-bucket/example/latest`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a. Now you can export all objects from `main` branch to `s3://company-bucket/example/latest`:
```

Author: Done.

```scala
val branch = "main"
exporter.exportAllFromBranch(branch)
```

> b. Assuming a previous successfull export on commit `f3c450d8cd0e84ac67e7bc1c5dcde9bef82d8ba7`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
b. Assuming a previous successful export on commit `f3c450d8cd0e84ac67e7bc1c5dcde9bef82d8ba7`,
```

Author: Done.
